Overview
You'll call a free AI API in a script that reads each problem/solution, generates structured tags,
and writes them back to your database.

Free API Options
Gemini (recommended for this use case)
● Gemini 2.0 Flash is free via Google AI Studio with generous limits (1,500 req/day, 1M
tokens/min)
● No credit card required, just a Google account
● Get your key at: aistudio.google.com

Step-by-Step Plan
Step 1 — Define your tag taxonomy first. Decide what tags you actually want before touching
any code. For olympiad problems, you likely want categories like: subject (Algebra, Geometry,
Number Theory, Combinatorics), techniques (induction, pigeonhole, modular arithmetic,
construction, etc.), and topic keywords.
Step 2 — Design your prompt. Write a system prompt that tells Gemini your exact taxonomy
and asks it to return JSON only.
Step 3 — Write the tagging script.
Step 4 — Connect to your database. Use whatever DB you have — if it's SQLite/Postgres add
a tags JSONB column and UPDATE each row.

Key Tips
● Store raw tags as JSON in one column — easier to iterate on schema later
● Keep a tagged_at timestamp so you can re-tag selectively if you improve your prompt
● Batch carefully — at 1,500 req/day free limit, a 10k problem DB takes ~7 days; you can
parallelize slightly but watch rate limits
Based on your current tagging game plan, your system has a solid foundation for
automation, but it is missing several critical production-level components common in
robust AI data pipelines.

1. Quality Assurance (QA) & Evaluation
Your plan assumes the AI's first guess is correct, but LLMs often struggle with mathematical
reasoning and can produce "hallucinations" or logical errors.
● Human-in-the-loop (HITL): You are missing a mechanism for human experts to review
and correct labels, especially for complex or "low confidence" problems.
● Gold Standard Sets: You lack a "gold set"—a small, manually verified dataset used to
calibrate the model's accuracy and ensure that prompt changes actually improve results.
● Self-Assessment: You could implement a "generator-critic" setup where a second LLM
call critiques the first one's tags for accuracy.
2. Advanced Prompting Techniques
The current prompt is direct, but math olympiad problems often require deeper reasoning for
accurate categorization.
● Chain-of-Thought (CoT): Instead of asking for JSON only, you should ask the model to
first explain its reasoning for each tag choice before providing the JSON.
● Few-Shot Examples: Adding 3–5 examples of difficult problems and their "perfect" tags
into the system prompt can significantly reduce errors.
3. Error Handling & Monitoring
The Python script is a simple loop, which makes it vulnerable to external failures.
● Retry Logic: You need specific handling for 429 (Rate Limit) and 5xx (Server Error)
status codes to ensure the script doesn't crash mid-database update.
● Schema Validation: You should use a library like Pydantic to validate that the JSON
returned by the AI actually matches your required schema before writing it to the
database.
● Observability: Tracking metrics like cost per problem, token usage, and latency will
help you manage your API budget and performance as you scale.
4. Database Integrity
● Version Control for Tags: If you update your prompt or taxonomy in the future, you
need a way to track which problems were tagged with which version of the prompt.
● Confidence Scores: Asking the AI to provide a confidence integer (1–10) for its tags
allows you to automatically flag uncertain rows for human review.

PROMPT:
Role: You are an expert Math Olympiad classifier and pedagogical researcher
Analyze the provided math problem and solution to generate accurate metadata for a
competition database
Taxonomy Guidelines:
Field: Must be exactly one of: [Algebra, Geometry, Number Theory, Combinatorics]
Difficulty: Scale of 1–10 (1 = Introductory AMC, 10 = IMO Shortlist/Hard Problem 6).
Techniques: Choose from [induction, contradiction, pigeonhole, modular arithmetic, Vieta's
formulas, barycentric coordinates, etc.], or another technique.
Topics: 2–7 specific keywords (e.g., "cyclic quadrilaterals", "functional equations").

Process:
Step 1: Briefly analyze the problem’s core logical requirements.
Step 2: Identify the main branch of mathematics (Field).
Step 3: List specific theorems or strategies used in the solution(s) (Techniques)+(Topics).
Step 4: Finalize the structured JSON.
Output Format:
Return your response in the following JSON structure ONLY. Ensure confidence_score is an
integer from 1–10 based on how certain you are of the classification.

{
"analysis": "Brief 1-2 sentence reasoning for the chosen tags",
"field": "String",
"difficulty": Integer,
"techniques": ["String"],
"topics": ["String"],
"confidence_score": Integer
}
